It started with sorting collections

This is a story about the birth of my sorting routines.  Since I have
a verbose writing style, It will be a long story.

One day I noticed that in our project we had a lot of sorting to
do. We had many custom collection classes and they all needed a way to
sort them. Up till then we used the storage classes to perform the
searching (ORDER BY in SQL clause).  It was my idea that once you have
a collection in memory, it is a terrible waste to throw it away only
to retrieve it later in an another order. I therefore took off to
write some classes for the following requirement :

Build something that is able to sort any collection

Since sorting is such a common thing, I took a look at far cousin C,
where I knew there is a predefined function to perform a QuickSort.
The function prototype goes like this :

void   qsort(void *, size_t, size_t, int (*)
       (const void *, const void *));

For those of us able to read C : there are mainly 2 parts in this
declaration : the first part defines the array to be sorted.  At which
address does it start, how large are its items, how many items are
there ?  The second part defines a function that is used to compare
two elements in the array.  If we compare this to our requirements, we
see that we have the same two parts.  In our case, the first argument
will always be a collection.  After all, the requirement is to sort a
collection. The second argument is a function pointer. While there are
ways to simulate passing functions around, VB actually offers a much
better approach.  All we need to do is define an interface for such
functions.  (technically, its an interface for an object, not a
function, but since these objects are actually functors, we choose not
to be too sharp in terminology).  Let's have a close look at the
prototype of the C function :

int (*) (const void *, const void *)

Comparers 

You should read this as a function that takes 2 arguments of any
type and returns an integer. With this in mind, the definition of our
comparer interface is actually quite simple : Interface iComparer
public function Compare (ByVal varFirst as Variant, ByVal varSecond as
Variant) as long So, a comparer takes two variants, compares them and
returns :

	a negative long if first < second 
	a positive long if first > second 
	zero if first = second

Having the comparer return a long is debatable, but it has the
advantage of having the relative order of two items in one function
call. Having variant arguments is even more debatable.  I use
variants because in VB6 a variant means anything. In .NET this will
probably change to Object.

After defining the iComparer interface, I was able to write the
sorting routine (it was a QuickSort)

Public Sub QuickSortCollection(ByVal objCollection As Collection,
ByVal objComparer As iComparer)

I was pleased with this implementation.  However, there are some
important remarks to be made :
	
Collections are black boxes, as far as VB programmers are
concerned. Internally a VB collection is most probably a doubly linked
list with an associated red/black tree that keeps the keys.  There is
no doubt that swapping items in such a data structure is suboptimal (to
say the least).  However, in my defense, I must say that there really
is no other way to do this (without hacking using implementation
details you are not supposed to know or use) I got a lot of critique
saying that collections are not something to be sorted.  But
Collection is just an interface and there is nothing preventing me
from giving it another implementation when I would like to (although
VB cannot implement the required interfaces - easily)
	
Collections provide no means whatsoever to get to the keys.  If you
swap two items in the collection, you'll lose the keys.  Again, there
is absolutely nothing you can do about it (although in general it can
be fixed, as we'll see later)

Apart from these remarks, my problem was solved and I was a happy man
(I was before too off course). Since I had the intention of writing a
reusable component, I figured it made sense to define some standard
Comparers.

From http://users.skynet.be/wvdd2/Sorting/sorting.html
